
\section{introduction}


News media serves a substantial role in democracies. Citizens broader understanding of the conditions and debates outside of our social circles is conditioned on news services. Without any such service, attitudes on national topics would be formed on what the imagination can conjurer. How effective media is at painting the picture of public debates is beyond the scope of this paper but one can find evidence that the relationship between this vital service and the public has soured over the decades. Trust in the information they get from national new sources hit a low of 56\% among all U.S. adults and dipped to 44\% among Republicans and leaning republican independents \autocite{pew_2025_trustmedia}. This dearth in trust is unlikely to suprise most academics in the field. The relationship of the public and news media has shifted dramatically over the decades. Trust in the press as an institution has fallen dramatically since the 70's,as high as 72\% of Americans in 1976, to 28\% of Americans in 2025 \autocite{Gallup_2025_trustmedia}. From its peak in the 1960's where the most trusted man in America was a nightly news anchor to the dirth we see today where the majority of Americans no longer hold considerable trust in news media. \par

Both demand and supply side changes to news media have accompanied this shift in American sentiment. Information supply expanded drastically from the days of the big three broadcasting in the 60's allowing individuals to pick and choose sources of information. Among the changes in choice set for Americans is dispersion of choices along partisan lines. Starting with Cable news increasingly offering commentary reinforcing partisan beliefs while counter-arguing unfavorable information, continual coverage of 24 hours news cycles, and shifting information to online and social media outlets. The level of trust among these partisan outlets is also sorted by partisanship. Among republican respondents 56\% trusted Fox News compared to 19\% of democrats. Similarly, 49\% of democrats trusted The New York Times compared to 16\% of republicans \autocite{Pew_2025NewsMediaTracker}. Taken together, the expansion of the choice set and partisan sorting imply a psychological process where citizens rely more heavily on who is speaking to infer what is being said and the downstream interpretation of the information. More formally, source credibility and partisanship may operate as cognitive shortcuts to shape comprehension and categorization of information. Heuristic processing is well described in political behavior literature, however, the literature is relatively silent on the impact of heuristic processing on information categorization. Specifically, if heuristics such as source cues influence how individuals categorize statements of fact and opinion. Categorization along partisan lines may be suggestive of downstream effects on citizen information processing, policy attitudes, and behavior. The focus here is on how partisan media use and distrust of outlets may influence the information processing. Specifically, at the outset does the presence of a media source cue trigger heuristic processing among partisans that influences how they categorize the information in the statement as a fact or opinion. \par




%This change is accompanied by dramatic changes in structure, from a few national networks and local newspapers to our current media environment with diverse media options that allow individuals to pick and choose what information they receive. These media choices emphazise choices for information consumers but also suggest clear mistrust of most media outlets while sticking closely to media that they consider the most objective. These changes also suggest that media has exaccerbated distrust of news among partisans. The news environment has become increasingly dispersed along partisan lines. Cable news increasingly offers commentary reinforcing partisan beliefs while counter-arguing unfavorable information. These effects are exacerbated by 24-hour news cycles and the ability to be highly selective of their information sources. Partisans also bring their own biases when discerning if sources provide reliable information. This suggests that media can have genuine biases in their reporting and that partisans tend to view these biases based on the source cue regardless of the actual information presented (Turner 2007).\par

\section{Information processing}




As discussed, individuals want to hold correct attitudes and make accurate decisions. As individuals process information, they gain insight into the consequences of alternatives \autocite{Lupia1998}. Citizens generally draw upon information from previous experiences or other individual’s actions or communication. For instance, when an individual purchases a new vehicle, they may consider earlier experiences with a particular brand. Poor experiences will reduce the chances of purchasing that brand in the future. However, without previous experience, individuals are likely to rely on information from others. Reports from automobile professionals are often relied upon to gauge the factors beyond aesthetic choices. How persuasive these messages are depends on how individuals process information and the factors of the message or messenger that are salient to the receiver. For instance, a car recommendation from a family member who works at a car dealership probably holds more weight than a recommendation from the salesman trying to sell you a specific car. You are more familiar with the former, and their motivation, (depending on the family dynamics i suppose), is to give you accurate information for a well-informed decision. The latter may also be motivated to get you the best car, but you may be more skeptical of their motivations. They could have long-term motivations to keep you happy and be a repeat customer, but they may also be trying to sell the car for short-term financial gains regardless of the best fit for your needs.\par

In similar vein research on the effects of attitude change suggest the source of information is a significant component in persuasion \autocite{Druckman2000}. In psychology, source credibility fits within the literature discussing how information is processed within the elaboration likelihood model of persuasion (ELM). As discussed in the previous example, persuasion is multifaceted, and individuals focus on different dimensions of information, the messenger, and the potential outcomes to make decisions. The facets that are salient to the information processor depend on how they are processed, specifically, the route of information processing taken by the individual. Delving into processing routes, argued by Petty and Cacioppo, the elaboration likelihood model of persuasion suggests two routes of information processing (1986). The routes were originally considered as distinct processes, but later research suggests processing occurs on a continuum; for clarity, they are discussed as different processes. Heuristics function as a peripheral route for processing cues that are associated with a "messenger" allowing “receivers” to reach conclusions based on limited cognitive effort (1986). Peripheral processing is one variation of processing within the elaboration likelihood model. These models describe individuals in terms of a dual-processing framework \autocite{Petty1986, Chen1999}. Dual processing models argue that individuals process information in two distinct paths. The peripheral path suggests that information processing occurs when individuals lack motivation or the ability to process the mes- sage through systematic processing \autocite{Petty1986}. In this case, individuals determine message accuracy by relying on shortcuts about the speaker, such as perceived credibility, shared group identity, or issue alignment.\par 

The second form is systematic processing which describes learning through an active/motivated process where information is analyzed by the quality of the arguments. This route suggests that individuals are motivated and capable of in-depth evaluation of an argument. Motivation indicates that it is important to hold a correct belief on an issue but, more importantly, that an individual is willing to roll up their sleeves and pay considerable cognitive attention to an argument. Motivation also suggests that the individual has the mental ability to process information and determine its veracity. For this route, messages with strong arguments or high-quality evidence are more persuasive to processors. The conception of argument strength under the ELM is based on “persuasive impact”, meaning arguments that generate predominately positive thoughts in the mind of the recipient \autocite{Park2007}. Additionally, the perceived strength of the argument may vary by education, knowledge, or cognitive ability. For instance, engineers or mechanics better understand technical documentation on vehicles than laypersons. This also speaks to a person’s motivation and costs. A layperson could spend significant time becoming informed on vehicle engineering with a better success rate of differentiating vehicle quality. However, the motivation to become well-informed would certainly be outweighed by the associated costs. Costs and motivation are why we tend to rely on information from sources that are more capable or willing to gather specialized information \par

In most instances, policy choices are complex. Like purchasing a vehicle, people tend to rely on type one processing to determine their preferences on policy choices. However, the effectiveness of this type of processing is unclear. The psychological literature does not mince words on human cognition. "In effect, all animals are under stringent selection pressure to be as stupid as they can get away with" \autocite{Richerson2005}. Evolutionary processes select better alternatives, and miserly processing is very effective in certain environments. These are characterized as benign environments, and these contain sound (accurate) cues that are easily exploited by heuristic processing \autocite{Stanovich2018}. Early work in public opinion tended to support the notion that politics was a valuable environment for heuristic processing. Political elites, in particular, are a source of information as their reputations are a helpful shortcut when they discuss policy alternatives \autocite{Calvert1987}. Source cues can offer appropriate shortcuts for individuals to hold opinions without attaining the information to be adequately informed \autocite{Mondak1993}. \par

In part, individuals transfer the dimensions of the source to the subject of discussion. For instance, a perception of the source as honest will condition voters to accept the information as credible \autocite{Sobel1985}. In addition, voters use their perception of others’ preferences of outcomes to judge the information provided by a source. Uninformed voters deciding between proposed insurance propositions were able to vote as if informed by discounting sources that they perceived to have preferences at odds with their own \autocite{Lupia1994}. One dimension that is often used is party identification. Partisans tend to view party (and party elite) cues as a valid source of information as they tend to view in-party sources as sharing similar preferences over outcomes \autocite{Brader2020}. While these can help individuals perform closer to being informed, there are reasons to believe that politics often does not represent a benign environment for individuals to properly take advantage of source cues.\par 

Unlike benign environments, hostile environments have few usable cues for autonomous processing. They are also likely to have misleading cues or sources aware of cues that trigger autonomous processing and exploit those for their advantage \autocite{Stanovich2018}. One area for exploitation is related to news sources and their perceived political ideology. Individuals can connect their perceived credibility or motivation of the source to their judgment of the message \autocite{KuklinskiHurley1994}. Indeed, individuals tend to use media outlets as a cue for the partisan bias of the information \autocite{Turner2007}. This suggests biases can be inferred from the source rather than the reported information.A highly polarized environment likely exacerbates this effect. While Americans may not be highly polarized in terms of policy \autocite{Hetherington2009,FiorinaAbramsPope2008}, they tend to be quite polarized in terms of how they view their party and the opposition \autocite{Iyengar2012}. Their affect toward their party has stayed relatively consistent, whereas feelings towards the out party have steadily decreased. Additional evidence suggests that partisanship as a social identity creates strong explicit, implicit, and behavioral bias for the opposition party \autocite{Iyengar2015}. The implication of these biases suggests that partisans will not only discredit messages from news sources they perceive as partisan opposition but also elite messages related to media partisanship may further discredit their messages. Elite and media messaging in recent years have persistently discredited opposition networks. The language is clear regarding labeling them as "fake news". These practices may result in individuals discrediting factual messages from specific sources or labeling them as opinions.\par